Update xcsync docs (#2593)
dotnet/docs-maui: docs/macios/xcsync.md

---

> title: xcsync

Reviewer: I think you also need to update the TOC files.
<img width="566" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4827de3f-43ab-46d3-9472-7891f1043e87">

Reviewer 2: I'd be inclined to leave the TOC title as is. Users should be able to glance at the TOC and have a clue what the doc is about.

Reviewer: The issue is using term `Xcode`, which is a registered trademark of Apple, in a manner that can be mis-interpreted as using it in the name of our product or feature. "Syncing with Xcode" or something similar would be better, where it is obvious that the term is referring to the Apple product and not one of ours. I would prefer to use the same nomenclature that the rest of the .NET Tools do, but this page now is co-mingled with the VS Code MAUI extension documentation.

Author: updated to Syncing with Xcode, @davidbritch let me know if you would like to still keep as is. as Michael mentioned, we've stopped referring to the tool as Xcode Sync in other areas (source code repo, nuget.org) since the last update.

Reviewer 2: Fine with me.

> title: xcsync

Reviewer: Thoughts on using `dotnet xcsync` for the title and the examples? If you look at the other dotnet tool docs it is formatted that way. One reason for it is that `dotnet xcsync` will work regardless of installing the tool globally or not.

Author: initially I was inclined to say yes, but after revisiting other examples like [dotnet format](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-format), I feel like this change could be a bit misleading for users.

format is run as `dotnet format [option]`
whereas here, the tool is run as `xcsync generate [option]` or `xcsync sync [option]` 

so I would prefer to keep as is unless we change how the tool is invoked.

Reviewer: > whereas here, the tool is run as xcsync generate [option] or xcsync sync [option]

Again, that is only true if the tool is installed globally. While we recommend it be installed globally, we should not assume that it is.

description: Learn how to use xcsync, to provide .NET developers with improved support for editing Apple specific files.
author: haritha-mohan
ms.author: harithamohan
ms.date: 10/30/2024
monikerRange: ">=net-maui-9.0"
no-loc: [ "xcsync" ]
---
# xcsync

## Name

`xcsync` - Provides Xcode support

## Description

> xcsync is a .NET tool that enables developers to leverage Xcode for managing Apple specific files with .NET projects. The tool generates a temporary Xcode project from a .NET project and synchronizes changes to the Xcode files back to the .NET project.

Reviewer 3: I'm not familiar with this technology at all. Is there a simple explanation of why would one want to do all this?

Reviewer: The .NET for iOS/macOS/tvOS/Mac Catalyst SDK's do not have any way of allowing the developer to easily edit files that are Apple specific, Storyboards, Property Lists, Asset Catalogs, etc. VS Mac, before its retirement had tooling that enabled editing of these files, either by providing an editor or by creating an Xcode project with the required files and opening that project in Xcode, allowing the developer to edit the files there, and when the developer returned to VS Mac, the changes would be synced back to the .NET project.

The `xcsync` tool bridges that gap left by the retirement of VS Mac, in a command line tool. Additionally, the .NET MAUI DevKit extension for VS Code has been extended to provide commands to run the tool.

Author: should this be included in the command description?

The tool has two commands: `generate` and `sync`. Use `generate` to create an Xcode project from a .NET project and `sync` to bring changes in the Xcode project back to the .NET project.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD025 -->

> # [Visual Studio Code](#tab/visual-studio-code)

Reviewer: Somewhere in this section we need to indicate that the commands are only available when using VS Code on macOS.

Author: thought this was clear since Xcode is necessary, but added a disclaimer

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD025 -->

## Installation

Install .NET xcsync globally with the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet tool install -g xcsync
```

## Usage

1. The [.NET MAUI extension](https://aka.ms/mauidevkit-marketplace) provides support for xcsync. Ensure you have the latest version.

> 2. Open the command palette (Cmd + Shift + P) and search for the `.NET MAUI: xcsync- Generate an Xcode project` and `.NET MAUI: xcsync- Sync from an Xcode project` commands.

Reviewer: Ideally there should be a space between 'xcsync' and the '-'

## Troubleshooting

To see details on errors related to xcsync, navigate to the **Output** window (<kbd>CMD + Shift + u </kbd>) and select **.NET MAUI - xcsync** in the dropdown. If you are facing issues, please [report an issue](#provide-feedback).

## Provide feedback

Please check existing [Known Issues](https://github.com/dotnet/xcsync/issues) before filing a new issue or suggestion.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD025 -->
# [CLI](#tab/cli)
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD025 -->

## Installation

Install .NET xcsync globally with the following command:

```dotnetcli

> dotnet tool install -g xcsync

Reviewer: The tool package name is `dotnet-xcsync`

Author: copy paste error 😀

```

## Synopsis

```dotnetcli

> xcsync generate [-p|--project <PROJECT>]

Reviewer: Missing the `-d, --dotnet-path <dotnet-path` option

Install .NET xcsync globally with the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet tool install -g dotnet-xcsync
```

## Synopsis

```dotnetcli
xcsync generate [-p|--project <PROJECT>]
[-tfm|--target-framework-moniker <FRAMEWORK>]
[-t|--target <TARGET_XCODE_DIRECTORY>] [-f|--force]
[-o|--open] [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
[-d|--dotnet-path <PATH>]

xcsync sync [-p|--project <PROJECT>]
[-tfm|--target-framework-moniker <FRAMEWORK>]
[-t|--target <TARGET_XCODE_DIRECTORY>] [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]

xcsync -h|--help
```

### Options

- **`-p|--project <PROJECT>`**

    The project file to build. Supported project types are .NET MAUI projects or any .NET project that targets a supported platform (iOS, tvOS, macOS, MacCatalyst).
- **`-tfm|--target-framework-moniker <FRAMEWORK>`**

    Invoke the tool for a specific framework. The framework must be defined in the project file. Examples: `net9.0-ios`, `net9.0-maccatalyst`. **Required** if the .NET project supports multiple target frameworks (for example, a standard MAUI project). If a single platform project, the default value will be the single target framework specified in the project file.
- **`-t|--target <TARGET_XCODE_DIRECTORY>`**

>     The directory in which to place the generated Xcode project. Default value is `./obj/xcode`.

Reviewer 2: Is this default value still correct? Or is it now $(IntermediateOutputPath)_/xcsync

Author: thank you for catching that, yes that should be updated as well!

- **`-f|--force`**

    Forces the overwrite of an existing Xcode project. Default value is `False`.
- **`-o|--open`**

    Opens the generated project in Xcode. Default value is `False`.
- **`-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>`**

    Sets the verbosity level of the command. Allowed values are `Detailed`, `Diagnostic`, `Minimal`, `Normal`, `Quiet`. Default value is `Normal`.
- **`-d|--dotnet-path <PATH>`**

>     Path to .NET SDK. Default value is path from parent process if dotnet, otherwise falls back to `dotnet` on PATH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Path to .NET SDK. Default value is path from parent process if it is `dotnet`, otherwise falls back to `dotnet` on PATH.
```

- **`-h|--help`**
  
    Shows help and usage information

## Examples

- Generate and open an Xcode project for a .NET MAUI project that uses the project file in the current directory, which supports the `net9.0-ios` [TFM](/dotnet/standard/frameworks):

    ```dotnetcli
    xcsync generate -tfm net9.0-ios
    ```

- Generate and open an Xcode project for a .NET MAUI project that supports the `net9.0-ios` [TFM](/dotnet/standard/frameworks):

    ```dotnetcli
    xcsync generate -p path/to/maui.csproj -tfm net9.0-ios
    ```

> - Sync changes from a generated Xcode project in the default location (*./obj/Xcode*) back to a .NET MAUI project that supports the `net9.0-ios` [TFM](/dotnet/standard/frameworks):

Reviewer: The standard location has changed for the 1.0 release.

```suggestion
- Sync changes from a generated Xcode project in the default location (*_$(IntermediateOutputPath)_/xcsync*) back to a .NET MAUI project that supports the `net9.0-ios` [TFM](/dotnet/standard/frameworks):
```

Install .NET xcsync globally with the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet tool install -g dotnet-xcsync
```

## Usage

> 1. The [.NET MAUI extension](https://aka.ms/mauidevkit-marketplace) provides support for xcsync. Ensure you have the latest version on macOS.

Reviewer: I think the fact that this tool only works on macOS needs to be more explicit. As in "The xcsync commands in the .NET MAUI extension are only available when using VS Code on a Mac."
